FayetteForward Podcast - Episode 042: "A City Is a Conversation" with Kyle Smith
URL: https://episodes.fayetteforward.show/episode/042-a-city-is-a-conversation-with-kyle-smith
Hosts: Nick Castin, Meredith Castin
Date: [June/July 2026]

--- TRANSCRIPT ---

[Full Otter.ai transcript preserved for campaign reference]

Nick Castin  0:13
You ready, this is Fayette Four, where we discuss trails, transit, city planning, and anything else that's on our minds.

Meredith Castin  0:30
goal is to keep Fayetteville moving forward in a positive, inclusive, and intentional way that benefits everyone who lives in this great city in the Ozarks.

Nick Castin  0:51
Hello, and welcome to Fayetteville. I'm Nick, with my wife and co-host Meredith, and today's guest is Kyle Smith. Kyle is a longtime Fayetteville resident and former city council member, whose work and interests sit at the intersection of housing, local government planning, and community building. He brings a perspective shaped by public service, advocacy, and hands-on work in the housing space. And he spent a lot of time thinking about what kind of city Fayetteville is becoming. He's a fan of the Strong Towns philosophy and is a member of the local chapter, Fayetteville Strong. We've been talking about having him on the podcast for a long time now, and we're thrilled to finally have it here with us today. Kyle, welcome to the podcast.

Kyle Smith  1:33
Sure, I like to say that I've got all the Fayetteville credentials by technicality, even though I didn't really grow up here. We moved to Fayetteville my senior year of high school, so I got my Bulldog diploma. Then I left town to go to college, but it's okay, because I came back for grad school, so I could get my name on the sidewalk. My grandparents moved in the 60s, my mom went to album to school here. So even growing up, this was second home. I was here all holidays and summers, and for as long as I can remember, Fayetteville has been kind of the home that I wanted to go to, probably got into advocacy through work. I was a public school teacher for 18 years here in Northwest Arkansas, taught in Bentonville and Springdale. I sponsored Bentonville's first day straight alliance when some kids wanted to start the group and asked me to do that for them, and then from there I got involved with NWA quality and worked on the 2014 campaign for a non-discrimination ordinance that one was repealed by the voters, but we listened to their feedback and concerns and made a commitment to bring back another version, and so in 2015 I wrote the city's second non-discrimination ordinance, that one we worked with the city council to take straight for the voters. It passed, unfortunately, it was overturned by the state Supreme Court, but that was really my entry into political life and family. Was spending a lot of nights at city council just watching procedure during all of that to make sure that you know all of our plans stayed on track and nothing taught us by surprise. Once that campaign was over, I realized I really enjoyed that environment. Whenever I had a stack of math papers to grade, I would take them to sit in the back of City Hall and just watch the meetings, and it was either that or to only watch TV while I'm working, but I could do my evening work and stay in touch with what was going on in City. Through that, I just absorbed a lot of what folks would normally consider the mundane operational minutia of how a city works, and it was really interesting to see all the interacting pieces. I was on the environmental action committee for a few years. There was a whole nother look behind the scenes of city government, and I'd encourage anybody in town who is curious about the community to figure out what it is they're interested in, because Fayetteville probably has a board of commission about that, that you can get involved in, and you may think that you're coming to advise, but you'll also learn a ton about what's really going on. It's great way to, that's a sidebar, but then my council member resigned unexpectedly, and I got appointed to three years of his four year term, and suddenly I was filling out most of a city council term, and it was a really interesting time. It was a lot going on in the city, a lot of exciting things.

Kyle Smith  4:14
I was appointed in November of 2017 and served through the end of that term ending 2020 The city council and the mayor's office at that time, it was really, really high functioning, doing a lot of great work. It's when we saw our master plan redone, and a lot of investments in parks and trails and street infrastructure. The things that we really love about Fayetteville, and that y'all, anytime you're on an urbanist topic, get into all those, yeah, that's the stuff I want to hear about, but a lot of it was really a tie point, right about me. So, it was an exciting time to be on city council and in the transportation committee. It was honestly some of the most fun that I've had in my life, representing people in my community and listening to folks who had problems or concerns, and really being able to take those and represent what your solutions would,

Kyle Smith  5:14
that's kind, I've also been described as a gadfly, do-gooder, troublemaker, honestly, at this point I'll play the ball, but they've all fit at something.

Kyle Smith  5:26
all. That's my other family.

Kyle Smith  5:37
Well, you know, honestly, city council meetings - that's one of the things I love about Fayetteville. City council meetings are one of the best sources of free public education that you can get. Like, yes, I mean, public schools are great. That's where I committed the first 18 years of my career, but you know, in Arkansas, we quit teaching civics about a decade ago, and if you want to see how stuff works in the real world, you go sit in the city council meeting and watch people stay in the podium and talk about what's going on in lives and watch how things get done, and then go out in the city and see it made real on the ground. That's awesome.

Kyle Smith  6:22
I'm working for a developer. We do neighborhood development, mostly Benton County. Got a project in Bentonville, couple of Cave Springs, and working on it. It is a complete change from teaching, but honestly, my city council experience, plus my teaching, was the perfect pivot. It's a little bit of chaos. Every day is different, managing ADHD kids in the math classroom was great prep to get ready for a small office environment where we're always trying to make something big, so yeah, I'm working in development now, which seems like a big shift from education, but really it comes back to the passion for housing that I developed as a council member.

Kyle Smith  7:20
I like to say that I entered city council as a nice, respectful moderate, and that the experience there kind of radicalized me into a housing advocate. Been a lot going on with the housing authority early on, and then I think anybody who's listened to your podcast knows housing is always a big topic. We've got a lot of growth and not as much construction as we've needed over the years, and that's left our housing supply come this match to the community need. Folks struggle, and when you hear that all the time, you gotta find ways to help folks.

Kyle Smith  8:23
Yeah, it's interesting being on the other side, because I used to think about, okay, how do we protect our neighborhood character? How do we get our regulations set up so that we're producing the right kind of built environment, and now I'm trying to build the kind of environment that we think that buyers want, and a place where they want to live, and have to navigate other cities' regulations, and figure out how to do that. When the regulations are making it hard to give folks the interesting spaces that they want, sometimes our development regulations, they're usually a reaction to something that happened in the past, and a lot of times they're either an overreaction or they're a blanket solution that doesn't hold up all of the time, and so that's part of what pushes us towards those homogenized everything feels the same last character sort of development that people complain about in a lot of ways. We've done it for selves.

Kyle Smith  9:36
Yeah, there's a big movement right now for the single stair code reform, and if you were at CNU the last month, there were several sessions on that. It's a really great example, because the issue there is, yeah, like probably back in the 40s it was a big fire and there were egress problems, and some folks, unfortunately, were told to fire, and so it's right to have code that addresses that, but the implications of that, the solution I think was, you have to have two stairwells, and two stairwells need a hallway connecting them, and then you've got a hallway through a building, cuts the building in half, and so if you've got apartments there now, they're all looking out one side of the building and opening into a hallway, and that has problems with like light and air flow, so there's a lot of unintended consequences that come from that, and then we end up seeing that, yeah, all of our apartment buildings end up looking pretty much the same, but we do that in all areas of our code, probably the other big one that you wouldn't even think about, but applies to maybe 60% of our city is minimum lot sizes and lot frontages, where you know, like we talked about our quarter acre zoning a lot, that's a similar result, like we get streets and walks that all look the same because our regulations put an artificial constraint on the property that you know, after the 70 or so years we've been doing it, feels like the tradition, but they're not the most enjoyable places in town. When people are talking about places they really love, sometimes it's the older places that predate the regulations that people find the most enjoy hanging out.

Kyle Smith  11:44
As far as a vision for Fayetteville, I don't think you can paint a picture of a city and just have it be their static. I think the city needs to be more of a conversation that we have together over time, because we're all in it, and it's got to evolve, and it's got to adapt, and it's got to address all our needs. So, back to your question on Strong Towns. I've never heard of Strong Town until I was on city council and looking for information and resources about how do we solve some of these problems that we have. Stumbled across a couple articles online, a few videos. Oh, here's a podcast... I said, "Hey, Margaret, what do you think about blah blah blah? He says, "You got that wrong, yeah, it's the Strong Towns Group. I don't know, it's an interesting idea. He says they seem kind of libertarian for you, and I have learned over time with housing, especially as being such a big issue. Sure, it'd be nice if we could just mandate more housing, the right kind of housing, but we live in a free market system, and what I was hearing from Strong Towns was, let's make it easier for the market that we have to deliver what we need, whether it's the market we want or not, it's what we have, right? And so, let's make it easier for people to use the system to give us, but yeah, you were saying Strong Towns is bipartisan, it's really like local issues cut across partisan boundaries in such interesting ways, and I love that Strong Towns is nonpartisan, and that so is our local government, because so much of that garbage that happens in red blue politics is, is just, it doesn't matter when you're talking about flushing toilets and paving streets and sidewalks.

Kyle Smith  13:45  (on fiscal solvency)
As I've really gotten into working with our local Fayetteville strong group and talking about the Strong Towns philosophy, fiscal solvency has to underline everything, right? When we run out of money, we can't do much. One of the strong towns principles is that land is the base resource of a city, and it can't discomfort. We can't make more land, so what we do with it has to yield enough revenue and enough resources for us to do all of the other things that we want to do, is to see that really, I think, over the last few years has started to click as we look at the growth around us, and are also starting to see some of the issues with infrastructure, you know, we've, we just had a big bond issue where it was a major point that our water and sewer systems have not kept up, the parts that we have are in disrepair, and there's maintenance that has to be done, and so I think it's probably more important now than it ever has been that we recalibrate our attention to how we develop our land, the types of systems that we're going to be maintaining on that land for the next 5080 100 hopefully longer years, and also that we are figuring out how to take care of the stuff that we already have.

Kyle Smith  15:56  (on examples of land use)
Yeah, I think people are always nervous about doing something new without an example, but it's hard to do something new if you're always looking for examples, right? And to be honest, it's hard to look around and see really great examples because our code has made it so hard to do new things. Now folks have no problem looking around finding the counter examples, the places where we had squandered land. There's this one parcel out on Weddington that always comes to mind. It's just past the links before you get out to Rupel, where one day they were just cutting trees, and then they were in a pile, and they were burning for weeks... and now it's finally being developed... it's got a Chipotle dressing. Don't get me wrong, I love me some burritos, but I don't know that a drive-through is necessarily the best way to use the land, because it separates our buildings, makes it hard to walk from one place to the next creates lots of points of conflict between pedestrians and vehicles.

Kyle Smith  17:49  (on tree preservation)
I think our tree preservation ordinance is one of the tables, like shining stars of one time when this community decided something was important and did a big thing to protect it, but it's not perfect. There are some loopholes in it, like we talked about, and we've cleaned up a few of them over the years, but that just shows you that a policy like that has to be kept up to date. It has to evolve with needs and has to evolve with the changing needs of the community.

Kyle Smith  18:56  (on what makes Fayetteville distinct)
That's funny, you asked that, because I always like to start conversations with people like, what do you love about your neighborhood?

Kyle Smith  19:47
and also identified a big old laundry list of infrastructure that we've spent a lot of effort thoughtfully investing in this town, so that it's a great place to be, right. And so last month, seeing you there were planners from all over the country here [at CNU], and we set up our little Strong Towns parking exhibit in the parking lot up here at City Hall, and folks were stopping by... something I heard several times from like three or four to five different people, were you know, Fayetteville's just got a really cool vibe about it, and so it feels neat to be here.

Kyle Smith  22:02
I don't know if it comes from being a university town. I know that brings a lot of the youthful vigor to a town, but it also, I think, tends to go along with a more educated community, and we have a lot of people in Fayetteville who are experts in something, they're well informed, very thoughtful... Fayetteville folks are opinionated and involved, and they will let you know what they're thinking, that's what makes it so much fun to be involved in building this place.

Kyle Smith  23:00  (on most important issues)
You know, right now I think it's more important than ever that we protect that thing we love about Fayetteville. It is a place where you can find home and community. It's hard for a lot of folks right now... I think if there were one thing that needed to be addressed, it's that we've got to address housing and the struggle that people in our community are having finding the right housing.

Kyle Smith  23:55  (on zoning reform)
I mean, I don't know that it's low hanging fruit, but I would say, if we could only throw out our entire zoning code, and redo it from scratch... Zoning code dates back to the 60s and 70s, I mean, we've bolted some pieces onto it through the years, and we've tried to fix issues as they come up, but the core of the thing is still older than me, and it's probably time we reevaluate.

Kyle Smith  26:55  (on balancing preservation and progress)
They are, and I think it's natural for folks to find a place they love and want to hold on to that, but the truth is, you know, time only flows in one direction, and so if we're not future focused, then we're looking the wrong direction... Folks like to keep table funky, right? We want to keep it unique, but to do that, we've also got to keep table fresh, you know? Otherwise, it becomes stale... It's really easy for a local vibe to turn into a corporate takeover, because if you're not keeping the local vibe fresh, then the corporations know what they're doing.

Kyle Smith  28:54  (on incremental growth)
really the game that we've built, and don't hate the player, hate the game, right, that's not the outcome we want, we need to fix our policies, so that they support local efforts in a growing city... if we are willing to adapt a little at a time across our whole city, the change doesn't hurt, it just feels natural.

Kyle Smith  30:54  (on incremental wealth creation)
kind of want to reframe that for a second, and think about incremental wealth creation, because that's historically how cities happen, right? Is you own your lot and you put a house on it, and then your family grew, and you add it on, and then your kids graduated, and you built a cottage in the back... It really ought to be our neighbors that we trust the most, because they own their house, they live there next to us for a while. They're not going to do anything crazy to disrupt the whole neighborhood... It's okay to take the regulatory caps off a little bit and let people build wealth in their own property.

Kyle Smith  33:58  (on neighborhood stores)
I love it. I mean, that's part of incremental development too, right, is adding services to your neighborhood, so that you know, instead of having to get in the car and add traffic to the road... maybe some of the stuff you need is just right there around the corner.

Kyle Smith  34:42  (on traffic)
Sometimes we humans aren't always the most rational... new development brings new people, and we think that's going to mean new traffic, but really that's if we continue to do new development that's just like the old development... if we design new development right and we adapt our city to it, then you can actually get a better mix of homes and businesses and services and the places that people want to go closer together, so that maybe some new development can actually reduce traffic.

Kyle Smith  36:30  (on public transit)
our transit has to be convenient. It has to get people where they want to go, and it has to get them during a reasonable amount of time, or else they're going to choose other things.

Kyle Smith  38:41  (on trails)
I think our trail system is really like the gold star on our report card... A trip needs to be safe and comfortable and useful and interesting. Those are his four criteria for somebody to choose to go on a walk, and our trails make it a lot safer and a lot more comfortable.

Kyle Smith  39:46  (on trail-fronted properties)
One of the coolest things that we changed in my last year on Free Council was 911 was having to respond to emergencies on the trail... they just coded them as a street and started giving the markers on the trail addresses... we amended the code that allow properties to be trail fronted.

Kyle Smith  41:15  (on local businesses)
I think when I talk to business owners, they're struggling a lot, similar to how people are struggling with housing... Stability, I think, is the biggest thing we could offer to local businesses.

Kyle Smith  43:00  (on Swarm/drone manufacturing debate)
What I think I took away from that whole thing is number one, don't be surprised that citizens of Fayetteville stand up and have a moral compass... I think it would be nice if we spent as much effort creating environment for small businesses and locals to start new businesses with confidence, as we do trying to reel in a big fish.

Kyle Smith  45:43  (on local control/preemption)
I like local control. Another strong tense principle is that local governments are the best instrument for local collaboration... I have watched Fayetteville be the target of preemption laws for more than a decade, laws that impact the entire state, whether they were trying to do anything or not, because somebody in Little Rock was mad about a Fayetteville policy, and that needs to stop.

Kyle Smith  46:37  (on public engagement)
I think that our public input should focus on people's goals and priorities... listen to the public for the big consensus of where we want to go, but don't waste their time asking them to look at lane widths and curb turn radiuses... We shouldn't ask non-experts to do expert work and then frustrate them that we don't listen to.

Kyle Smith  49:50  (on decision-making)
I think you start values first, and then you look at that. Once a solution is proposed, I like to game it out and think, okay, how will this be implemented? What will people's experience be using this system...

Kyle Smith  50:58  (on council meetings)
What I really love about Fayetteville Council meeting is that we do provide space for our community to come and be involved and have a voice... the goal was to come to a decision together, and then we did that, and then we went on to the next issue, and there were generally no hard feelings.

Kyle Smith  54:06  (on NWA Pride)
I used to work with NW Equality First as a volunteer and I was their treasurer and president back in 2012... since I got off council, I started volunteering with the parade line... I get to do the logistics and the really nerdy number crunching in organizing.

Kyle Smith  56:29  (on hope for Fayetteville)
To be honest, I don't have a lot of fear for Fayetteville or Northwest Arkansas in general. We got so much going for us. I'm confident that Fayetteville is going to be okay... If I had a worry about Fayetteville. It would be that we've got so much potential, we might choose not to live up to it... I said that I don't think the city is as much a static vision or a picture you paint as it is a conversation we have together.

Kyle Smith  56:52  (fun fact)
it is fun having a life with six cats in the house... big shout out to the Perk Cat Cafe... which is now smitten kids, and that is the reason why I have six, because to make the cat story long, I'm a sucker for litter mates and siblings.

Kyle Smith  59:38  (closing advice)
Oh, be nice to your neighbors, say hi to somebody, smile at somebody when you pass them on the trail, a nice word to your barista, you know, just bring a little joy to this community.

Kyle Smith  59:56  (shout outs)
NWA Quality and their work on Pride... Fayetteville Strong, the local Strong Towns chapter... Boulders with Brews, the rock climbing gym down on Dixon Street.
